---
date: 2021-01-26
title: "Narrative Driven Development"
linkTitle: "Narrative Driven Development"
description: "Get outside your own head by thinking in narratives."
author: Philip ([@pbwinston](https://twitter.com/pbwinston))
type: blog
summary: "Software development is a game that can be played by quick decisive
navigation of the narratives we find all around us."
---

A narrative is a chain of caused events leading from the past to the
present. There’s usually a main character, a setting, and the events take
place over some period of time. The narrative we are most familiar with is
the first-person narrative of our own lives.

I woke up this morning, took a shower, had breakfast, made a cup of coffee,
checked my phone, walked over to my desk, sat down at my laptop, read some
messages on Slack, checked Twitter, went to GitHub, opened my text editor,
and so on. That’s the narrative of my day. It’s my life from my point of
view.

{{< imgproc timeline-1 Resize "600x">}}
{{< /imgproc >}}

However, my own personal story is just one of thousands of narratives I
encounter each and every day. Every person I meet or talk to online is
experiencing their own personal narrative, but that’s just a starting
point.

Every file in my codebase has its own narrative, who created it, who has
been adding or changing lines. Every class, function, module, and library
has a narrative. Every bug or issue in the project has a narrative, every
piece of documentation. Every tool or dependency I use has its own story
arc: who created it, who uses it, what features are planned next.

My narratives are playing out within the context of my team’s narratives,
which fit within the narrative of the company which is part of my industry.
Eventually, it bubbles up to be part of the sweep of all human history!

{{< imgproc timeline-2 Resize "600x">}}
{{< /imgproc >}}

### Emotional Labor

Emotional labor means suppressing what you are actually thinking or feeling
as part of your job function. A restaurant server must show up refreshed
and cheery at each table, regardless of how his evening is going, or his
life in general.

The customer’s dining narrative does not include a server who complains
about his roommate, his car problems, or the previous table. When the
server’s personal narrative intersects the customer’s, the customer’s takes
precedence, primarily because of who’s paying.

Every profession involves some emotional labor. When your doctor walks in
you don’t expect her to tell a long story about her financial problems. The
focus should be on you. You are paying for her time but also her attention.

### Surfing Narratives

As a professional software engineer, you are also paid for your time. You
have some autonomy, but long term you are expected to solve your employer’s
problems.

Beyond the technical aspects of the job, I feel that efficiently jumping
from narrative to narrative is one of the most important skills I’ve
learned during my twenty-five years as a software engineer. I’m almost
constantly inhabiting some other point of view, outside of my first-person
experience. I’m thinking and reasoning from that point of view.

This skill is hard to teach, it’s something you learn over time. Also,
there’s no one right way to do it. This is a big reason why I feel
diversity on a team is critical. You need people playing this game in
different ways. No one person has it all figured out.

Looking back at the start of my career, I used to be bad at surfing
narratives. I was somewhat like a cork bobbing in the ocean. I would get
swept up in something that was going great, and I was thrilled, other times
things went horribly and I was crushed. Either way, I was a slave to the
circumstances, and I could not always see things from other points of view.

Today I try to be less like a cork and more like a surfer. Whether things
are going great or horribly, my basic algorithm is always the same. Survey
the water intently but quickly, choose where I want to go, where I can add
the most value or I’m most needed, then paddle there deliberately and
engage with full force.

This doesn’t mean I can’t be swamped by a big wave, but I’ll try to get up
and start paddling around again quickly. And the best thing is, this game
is satisfying regardless of the weather conditions. In fact, it can be
markedly more rewarding when things are stormy. When the challenge
is bigger, you can make a larger contribution if you execute.

### Narrative Orthogonality

The narratives we inhabit are not always positive and hopeful. Sometimes
they are frustrating, confusing, or bleak. Sometimes things go wrong, there
are looming or even insurmountable obstacles, personalities conflict, or
things temporarily fall apart. Often we are paid precisely because the
situation is painful. If it was fun and easy, someone would do it for free.

The good thing is that narratives are often independent of each other. I
can be tending a dumpster fire one minute, while killing it on some other
project the next. And I can leave both of these narratives suspended at the
end of the day, and not let them invade my life at home.

We ruin narrative independence when we drag our own mood from task to task.
When we look at everything through the same tainted glasses. The good
thing is your mood is like a bag of bricks, with practice you can learn to
put it down. It’s simple, but not easy. If you are having trouble keeping
narratives separate, you might need to debug yourself rather than your
code. Maybe start with sleep, diet, exercise, and relationships. Ask for
help if needed.

As an example of narrative independence, suppose your company is falling
apart. There’s a lot of in-fighting and the financial outlook is getting
bleaker by the month. This doesn’t mean you can’t be super excited about
the specific technical work you are doing. Or about your own career, since
you are likely in the process of looking for a new job. Or about working
with a teammate you admire. You could literally be whistling while you work
as the ceiling tiles fall down around you.

In the other direction, suppose you are stuck on a horrible bug, pulling
your hair out; your eyes are starting to bleed from the stress. That
doesn’t mean you can’t be super excited about the project in general, what
the rest of the team is doing, the company you are a part of, or your
profession. In fact, it’s exactly these larger narratives that can motivate
and recharge you when times are tough.

### The Craftsman Narrative

An iconic narrative of software engineering is someone hunched over their
keyboard editing text. My text editor, my keyboard, and my screen are all
expertly engineered artifacts designed to make the editing process
pleasant, effective, and efficient.

Editing text is a physical act. Hands flit over the keys, or depending on
your personal style they pound the keys into submission. Either way,
it’s a kinesthetic dance with rhythm and flair. I can perform this dance
pretty much whenever I want, no matter what else is happening around me,
it’s a respite from everything.

{{< imgproc keyboard Resize "600x">}}
My previous MacBook's keyboard
{{< /imgproc >}}

Craftsmen throughout history have used their hands to work leather, iron, or
wood. We think of our software jobs as purely intellectual, but there is a
substantial physical element, just as their jobs had intellectual
components.

But then they got down to the business of shaping matter, the business of
making noise. With our mechanical keyboards, we can make plenty of noise as
well. I’m going out back to the shop for a while to bang on the keys and
clear my head.

### Industry Narratives

One of the things I’ve loved about my career has been working in different
industries including Videogames, Neuroscience Research, Haptics, and
Autonomous Vehicles. I can’t imagine spending thirty-years in one industry.
I’ve found it really refreshing and enlightening to switch around, and I’ve
learned a lot that way.

A nice thing about switching industries as a software engineer is that you
can usually be productive very quickly. There are “subject matter experts”
who know the nuts and bolts of the field. While the software in most
industries is understandable by any competent programmer.

It’s like construction. Putting up drywall is roughly the same task whether
it’s drywall for a fast-food restaurant or a nuclear power plant. However,
if you are going to work on the reactor core itself, or the soda machine
for that matter, you might need additional training.

As industries evolve over time their narratives can be engaging and
exciting. Nimble startups burst onto the scene, lumbering incumbents
stumble, companies are bought and sold, luminaries shine or fade away,
fortunes are made or lost, innovations change the landscape and sometimes
the entire world. No matter how big or small your personal role was, it can
be very gratifying to have played a part.

### Trend Spotting

Most of the time switching narratives does not itself solve problems. We
still have to fix the bug, write the documentation, or work out the design.
The problem will usually be waiting for us when we return.

But switching narratives has often given me a different perspective. It can
be both comforting and eye-opening to temporarily inhabit a different
headspace. When you switch narratives, take some time to really load it up
into your mind.

Who are the players, what has been happening in the story so far, where
does it look like things are going? I try to use my whole self, not just my
technical skills. You should nurture your intuition and instincts, they are
some of the things your brain does best.

Switching narratives has helped me spot trends and patterns and come up
with ideas others have missed. The most impactful decisions or
contributions I’ve made in my career were the result of considering things
from a different point of view, or on a different time scale.

### Learning

Sometimes it's not enough to switch narratives, you want to reframe the one
you are in. A common reframing for me is seeing the frustrating or
difficult experience I’m enduring as learning. That usually changes my
feelings immediately.

When I’ve made a big mistake, or I can’t get something to work, or I’m
puzzled or confused, it can be incredibly frustrating. However, when I
realize what I’m really doing is learning, it’s an immediate salve.

Learning is a powerful narrative in software engineering; it’s something we
have to do constantly. We need to learn algorithms, data structures,
programming languages, APIs, third-party libraries, tools, the design of
our own software, the traits of our teammates, the customer requirements.
It’s endless.

In some ways, software development is really just an exercise in knowledge
acquisition. Suppose you have a team that cranked on some problem for a
year, would you rather keep the software they wrote and lose the team, or
keep the team and lose the code? In many cases, I’d much rather keep the
team.

Once in a while I’ll accidentally blow away a change, I’ll lose a few hours
of work. I’m always amazed when I rewrite it, how it takes a fraction of
the time and how the new version is markedly better. What I learned writing
the code the first time was more valuable than the code itself.

### False Narratives

False narratives are a major problem. If we think we’re in a narrative, but
we’re not, our judgments about the present and our predictions about the
future could be totally wrong.

Conspiracy theories are one type of false narrative. Conspiracy theories
are insidious and destructive. They lead their followers into making an
endless stream of bad choices and judgments, poisoning the water for
everyone.

A conspiracy theory in software engineering might be something like
“there’s a bug in the compiler” or “the database is flakey” or “the other
team is out to get us”. Not that these things are never true, but if you
explain away a problem by waving your hand vaguely at something else, you
are forgoing an opportunity to find out the truth and learn something. I
try to actively stamp out rumor and superstition whenever I can.

Another false narrative is thinking I’m an expert and therefore things
should be easy. I sometimes find myself getting frustrated because
a task is much harder than I expected. This particularly happens when
working with a new tool or library I’m unfamiliar with. When I have to
start over at square one.

I think the better narrative for an “expert” is someone who with patience,
time and effort can solve difficult problems. With this narrative, one of
the most important things I do as a professional is carving out that
focused time for doing the work. Often when I can’t seem to get something
done, the root reason is I have not really dug into it yet.

An expert furniture maker requires many hours to produce a beautiful piece
of furniture. They are an expert because they can consistently put in the
lengthy effort required to produce high-quality output, not because they
whip through it fast, not because it’s become easy for them.

### Decision Maker

Another false narrative about experts is they always make the right
decision. I prefer to strive to be a “good decision-maker” more than
someone who always makes “good decisions”.

A quick, light, decisive decision-making process is essential because you
will need to make hundreds of decisions every day. Almost every code change
is the result of some decision. The thing to realize is most decisions are
two-way doors, the cost to reverse the decision is modest. But if you
agonize over decisions that could be disastrous, even if you make the right
call in the end. In basketball, you often need to decide whether to shoot
or pass. Either option is vastly better than hesitating and losing the
ball.

On the other hand, if you are faced with a tough decision that you can’t
make quickly, figure out what new information you need in order to make the
decision, then obtain that information quickly. Whether it requires
research, finding help, or doing an experiment, a good decision-maker time
boxes acquiring the necessary information then pulls the trigger.

### Partial Narratives

Beyond false narratives, I’ve learned to watch out for partial narratives.
These can be tricky because they seem true, but you are missing the rest of
the story.

Often people think the number of hours that they work per week is the main
independent variable for their work output. Hours do matter, but so many
other things matter as well.

{{< imgproc hours-1 Resize "512x">}}
{{< /imgproc >}}

Writing new or better tools can yield enormous benefits that dwarf any
gains from just putting in more hours, by orders of magnitude. Similarly,
small improvements to team dynamics or communication can have huge
compounding benefits over time.

Imagine a team where everyone is collaborating brilliantly, magnifying each
other’s work, compared to a bunch of grumpy people heads down just putting
in lots of hours. I’ve been in both situations. I’m very skeptical when
anyone says putting in more hours is the only way to get the job done. Very
often there is a better route that comes from being creative or
resourceful.

{{< imgproc hours-2 Resize "512x">}}
{{< /imgproc >}}

Meanwhile though, when faced with a difficult bug or problem, often the
solution does involve putting in quite a bit of time. This might include
taking a step back and writing a tool, or it might mean doing a deeper
analysis than anyone was willing to do so far. Or just being more
methodical and careful than was done previously. Very often, solving a
problem others could not involves putting in more time than they did.

### Personal Narrative

None of this is to say our own personal narrative does not matter, or the
personal narratives of our friends and co-workers. In fact, the game here
is the same, we need to strive to always be aware of these other points of
view, and then turn our full attention to them at times.

When then pandemic struck and people lost the casual in-person interactions
of the physical workplace, there was a real struggle as to how to replace those
informal interactions with something that worked online.

The resulting video encounters sometimes felt stilted, but they were
essential. I think establishing and preserving a human connection in online
interactions is in its infancy, and it's something I hope we get better at
a species as the years go on.

### Contain Multitudes

I find that the expert fallacies discussed above are also true when I write
in English. After many years of writing, I’m constantly amazed at even
today how lousy my first drafts can be. The main thing I’ve learned over
the years is to have confidence that with time and effort I can hammer the
prose into shape.

I’ve written articles for Wikipedia and seen people sweep through
contributing small single-purpose edits. Someone might focus on changing
“your” to “you’re”, someone else might specialize in splitting up complex
sentences, a third person might replace poor quality images with better
ones.

When I edit prose or code, I try to be all of those editors, but not all at
the same time. Each time I read things through I’ll find a few problems, a
few rough edges. I sand those edges off and read it again. Another rough
edge, why didn’t I see that one the first time? No matter, sand it off. If
the code or writing is important I might read it fifty times and sand off
a hundred edges.

{{< imgproc sanding Resize "600x">}}
{{< /imgproc >}}

One of the most satisfying experiences is reading code or prose after many
iterations and _not_ noticing any rough edges. Did I miss something? Read
it once more. Nothing stands out; now we are getting somewhere.

Doing this with code in particular is kind of magical. As I read it line by
line everything seems well-factored and well-named. I can visualize exactly
how the code will execute. Nothing is ever fully done, but I’m done with
it. I’m ready to move on to something else. I’ve created something of
lasting value. Now that’s a narrative with a happy ending.
