
---
title: "Philip Winston"
linkTitle: "About"
date: 2020-04-16
weight: 20
type: docs
menu:
  main:
    weight: 20
---

**Founder**

![Headshot](headshot.jpg)


[PDF Resume](/philip_winston_resume.pdf) &middot; [LinkedIn Profile](http://linkedin.com/in/pwinston)

I've been writing software professionally for more than 25 years. I've worked in
many different technical industries such as CAD, Haptics, Video Games, Military
Simulations, Neuroscience Research and for the last three years I was helping to
create maps for self-driving cars. See my [projects page](/about/projects) for
pictures of the projects I've worked on.

### Guitar Hero 
I was lucky enough to be the Lead Programmer on the original Guitar Hero video
game released by Harmonix in 2005. The Guitar Hero franchise went on to over one
billion dollars in sales by 2008. It was a great experience working with a super
veteran team who had been making music-based games for eight years before I even
came on board.

At Harmonix I learned a ton about software engineering, the rigors of console
game development are legendary, but I also had a blast working with the artists
and musicians. I learned a lot about project management, game design, and
designing user experiences in general. I've applied many lessons from the video
game industry to my subsequent projects.

For example at HHMI I created a tiled image viewer for electron microscope
images. I made it a priority to keep the viewer running at 60Hz at all times,
the same goal we set for the console games. This degree of polish was not
typical for research tools, but everyone seemed to appreciate how well it ran.

### The Cloud

For the last three years I've been focused on cloud-based data pipelines. While
I still enjoy graphics, I'm very interested in continuing with cloud-based
development. The cloud has or will touch every corner of the software industry
and it's a fascinating stack of technologies.

One of my big takeaways from the cloud work is that the lessons learned from
decades of traditional single-computer software engineering fully apply to the
cloud world. The cloud is best thought of as a single large computer, where the
many cloud services are like the operating system API's of old, so my lengthy
experience with traditional software engineering translates over very well
to the cloud world.

### Remote Work

Once the COVID restrictions are over I'm happy to travel for meetings and
planning discussions, but I will do the bulk of the work remotely. I've worked
remotely from my home for over a decade for several different companies. I love
to discuss things on chat or video, so I'll be very available and visible on
your project.

### Contact Me

I'm interested to hear what projects you are undertaking during the remainder of
2020 and how I might be able to help.

Drop me a line on email *philip @ tobeva.com* or on Twitter
[@pbwinston](https://twitter.com/pbwinston).
